Hi.
My name's Jerry Hembd, and I'm
going to be your instructor
for Sustainable Management
740, the Economics of
Sustainability.
I'm a professor of economics
at the University of
Wisconsin-Superior.
I'm also state specialist in
Community and Economic
Development with the
University of
Wisconsin-Extension.
So I've got the best
of both worlds.
I get to teach part of the time,
and I'm working with
communities around the state,
primarily in the areas of
sustainability.
I've been at UW-Superior
since 2004.
This is my second time
at UW-Superior.
I was originally there from
1984 through 1991.
I purposefully picked my
home as a place to
do the intro video.
Economics instructors often
start their courses by going
back to Latin and Greek roots
of economy or economics.
And it basically means
household management.
So I thought I'd start with my
own household, make a few
comments about management here,
and connect those in
some way back to the course.
And as I do that, I'm going to
hit a theme that we'll be
talking about throughout
the semester.
I like to do a lot of
contrasting between individual
behavior, individual change
and systemic or global
behavior or systemic change,
and sort of play those off.
And I'm going to make the case
during the semester that while
changes individual behavior
are good, that what we are
probably really looking at is
some sort of systemic change,
maybe even a change in
paradigms, as we look at the
economics of sustainability.
So I'll talk about a couple
examples here at home.
And I'll note right now, if
you're in a class of mine, I
don't work without a net.
I always have notes
that refer to.
So I'm going to keep referring
to those as we go along.
You can't see this looking at
me now, but I live about 20
miles from Superior.
My wife and I both commute to
work, and our work schedules
aren't the same.
So while we enjoy the benefits
of rural living, and there's
some reasons why we like to live
out here, any time we do
any sort of ecological footprint
analysis, we're way
off the scale.
And so, while this works for
us individually, and we may
have reasons for doing it, it's
obviously not the sort of
commuting pattern or lifestyle
that if everybody did it in
the world, that would be
highly unsustainable.
And so, one of the things
we'll look at during the
course is different
relationships, work, home
relationships, and how those
might change as we look at
individual versus
systemic change.
I have a garden out back.
I've been growing vegetables
for the last
seven or eight years.
I use square foot gardening.
I experiment with some
permaculture techniques.
Short growing season this far
north, and I only provide a
very small portion of my food.
It's a good individual change
effort, but if we're talking
about food provision on a
national or global scale,
obviously if everybody did what
I did, that wouldn't be
enough food to provide food.
My wife has two sheep that her
sons gave her for a Mother's
Day gift a few years back,
Doc and Wyatt.
Nice thing about sheep
is you can use their
manure right on gardens.
Doesn't have to be composted.
And they provide wool.
And so, those are things
that they provide us.
But if I had to be honest, in
the main thing that the sheep
do is they provide my wife
with a lot of joy.
She loves just looking at them,
spending time with them.
And so another thing we'll look
at during the semester is
financial gains or material
things versus
non-material ones.
I have my vegetable garden, if
you look behind me and around
the grounds.
My wife has a lot of
flower gardens.
And that brings both of us
a lot of satisfaction.
We can't eat it, but it has
a value to us, and it's
important for the way we live.
I mentioned before, we live
20 miles out of town.
So another thing we'll look at
in the course is rural versus
urban behavior, living patterns,
and sustainability,
and the implications of those
two kinds of lifestyles.
Like every American, primarily,
I have all kinds of
neat tools in my garage.
I've got a lawnmower.
Because I live up north,
I have a snow blower.
I've got a drill, table saw.
The list could go on.
And like most tools and most
people, I only use
those every so often.
And so another thing we'll look
on the consumption side,
there's been talk recently
about collaborative
consumption.
Probably, a lot of households
could get by with just the
tools I've got in
my own garage.
So that would be another
systemic change, rather than
an individual change.
I use wood as a secondary
heat source.
And we've got lots of wood in
this part of the state.
But again, that's not something
everybody could do
at a systemic level.
One other thing I like about
living here-- and
I've lived in cities.
In the past, I've lived in
Boston and San Francisco--
is I know my neighbors.
And relationships are another
key part of the things we'll
be looking at in the course.
And when we start talking
about how do we measure
well-being, human well-being,
we'll look at the research
that shows that, really,
it's the importance of
relationships beyond a certain
income scale that really
provide us with happiness
and well-being.
And these relationships with
our family, with friends,
neighbors, and colleagues.
And so that's another thing I
like about this particular
living choice.
The house behind me, a friend
of mine built in the 1970s.
He's about my age, and this was
a time when there was what
was referred to as the
back-to-the-land movement, the
hippie era, I guess, for lack
of anything better to say.
A lot of recycled material has
gone into the house, railroad
ties, floors out of old
public schools.
He found some stained glass
windows, and so we tried to
carry that on with remodeling,
too, in
terms of reused materials.
So that gives you a
sense of my place.
And I thought a good way to
start would be for you to know
me, see my place.
Because I live this far out of
town, a lot of times I will be
working on the course
I'll be here.
One of the nice things about
online courses is that I can
do this from home.
I do have high-speed
internet access.
And so many times when I'm
interacting with you, I'll be
sitting in my upstairs room
here, working on the course.
I want to give you, now, just
a little bit of my personal
background, how I came to be
at Superior, and why this
course is of particular
interest to me.
I started my professional
career here in 1984.
And I spent seven years here,
left, and came back in 2004.
And so I want to just
note some of the
pieces along the way.
After I got my undergraduate
degree in urban planning--
I grew up in Iowa, ended up
getting an urban planning
degree from the College of
Agriculture, just because I
wanted to think of both
the rural and
urban aspects of that.
I spent a couple of years in
the Peace Corps in the
Philippines, where I worked
as an urban planner.
And that started my longer
term interest in working
internationally and looking at
various types of development.
After my Peace Corps years,
I got a master's degree in
agricultural economics at the
University of Kentucky.
They were actively recruiting
ex-Peace Corps volunteers.
And one of the things I
discovered working with
communities in the Philippines
was what they really were
interested in was economic
knowledge and strong
agricultural background, which,
although I was an Iowa
farm boy originally, I really
didn't have in terms of
through the economics
of agriculture.
So I went back, got
my degree there.
My graduate school
agreed with me.
I went on to get another MA
and then a PhD in applied
economics from Stanford
University.
And I did my dissertation
research.
I was able to go back to the
Philippines on a Fulbright
grant where I looked at uneven
regional development in the
Philippines.
My first job, then, was here
at UW-S. And as I mentioned
before, it's split appointment
between teaching and outreach.
I went from here to Iowa State
University for three years,
where I directed the community
development program
state-wide, as well as taught in
the Department of Community
and Regional Planning.
Then I had either a midlife
epiphany or midlife crisis,
depending on how you want
to think about it.
I stepped away from my tenured
faculty appointment and did
some camping and hiking around
for about a half a year, and
then took a short-term teaching
position with the
National Economics University
in Hanoi, Vietnam.
Actually, this is before
we had formal
relationships with Vietnam.
And so I had the opportunity to
teach Vietnamese academics
and practitioners interested
in economic development,
sustainability, and
microeconomics.
After that, I taught for a
couple of years with what's
called the International
Honors Program.
It was a global ecology program
where we traveled
around the world for
eight months.
30 undergraduates, and there
were three traveling faculty
members and ecologists
and economists and an
anthropologist.
And that was an amazing way to
teach and learn as we spent a
lot of our time in villages
in a variety of countries.
And then before coming back to
UW-Superior, I worked for a
couple of years with an
organization called Future
Generations, and helped them
develop a master's degree in
applied community change
and conservation.
So I helped develop that, and
I got to teach in that
program, and went with the
students there when
they went to India.
So if I had to give us a summary
of my background, my
key interests have been
international.
I've got a long-term interest in
things international, going
back to my Peace Corps days.
I've got a long interest
in sustainability.
I think the Peace Corps
experience got me started to
think about it, carried through
graduate school.
And when I got my PhD in the
early '80s, 1980s, there
wasn't a lot of interest or call
for people that taught
sustainability.
So it's been really exciting for
me the last 10 to 15 years
to see that turn around.
And now, at this stage in my
career, it's really fun for me
to actually be able to bring
their expertise to bear in
classes like this one.
So in a sense, this is a class
I've been wanting to teach all
of my career.
So I'm really excited about
being able to teach it.
The other two emphasis areas
are development--
and although it's economic
development, it could be
community development,
agricultural development, I
look at development from a lot
of different lenses or
viewpoints.
And then since I've been working
with UW-Superior and
UW-Extension, a lot of my work
is at the community level.
And so I'm not just a
classroom teacher.
3/4 of my position is actually
working directly with
communities around the state.
And I also share this at
national conferences through
professional associations.
So I've got a long-term history
of working directly
with communities, especially
local governments and
nonprofit organizations.
And lately, this has taken me
into things like The Natural
Step, Transition Towns, Business
Alliance for Local
Living Economies,
permaculture, ecological economics.
A lot of these are topics
that we will be
touching on in the course.
So just some comments
about the course.
I'll be overviewing each of the
units separately, but I
want to just give you some
operational notion of how I
come at the course, and some
of my views, and, to some
extent, expectations.
My orientation is looking at
this course as understanding
the relationship between the
human enterprise, what we as
humans do, and that relationship
with the global
ecosystem, and specifically
the economic
components of that.
My sense is you'll be hearing
a lot about economic trends
and implications in a lot
of the other courses.
I'm going to come at it more
specifically from the view
from the economics discipline,
both in a conventional manner
and an alternative manner.
There is no prereq to get into
this major or this course.
And so if you're concerned about
not having had economics
before, I have a history of
teaching classes for both
non-majors and people without
any economics background.
I've kept that in mind as I've
developed this course.
There will be a couple places
during the semester where
there will be some expectation
for those of you that have not
had economics to do a
little extra work.
But I'll provide the information
that you need to
do that, because it's really
important for you to
understand where economics is
now to have a better sense of
where it can and should go in
the future, and also why
certain policies are in place
based on the prevailing
economic paradigm.
I always tell students that
this isn't a class to give
them the right answers.
There's a lot of turmoil and
change within the economics
profession right now.
And we'll be looking at that
from a number of different
perspectives.
My intent is more to help
you ask either good
or the right questions.
And so it's a big emphasis
on probing into material.
I'm not going to be selling
a particular viewpoint.
I'm going to try to lay out
conventional versus
alternative thinking and then
ask you to make your own
decision on what makes the most
sense to you and why, to
make a case for why
you feel that way.
At this point in my professional
career, I also
feel like I have
become somewhat
of an economic historian.
And so I will be weaving longer
term trends into the
way that I outline the class.
And it's not an economics class
in a conventional sense.
I have a lot of emphasis on
ecological economics, and that
is a trans-disciplinary field,
so cutting across a lot of
different disciplines.
And I've been weaving
these together
for quite a few years.
So economics core, but a
trans-disciplinary approach.
And where one of the key
questions beyond the
individual global question
is looking at the
system we have in place.
Is there the potential
to reform the system?
Or do we need some sort of
alternative system, be it
economic, political, social,
or environmental?
All of you in this program are
professionals in your own right.
You're all knowledgeable
in your own right.
And so I want to acknowledge
that, front and center.
My expectation is that each
of you will bring your own
expertise to the course, that
you'll bring your own
contributions to the course.
And so this isn't just a one-way
education learning
experience.
You'll be sharing with all of
your peers in the course some
of your own knowledge.
It's almost like having a whole
set of teachers and
learners, rather than the
traditional teacher and a set
of learners.
The other orientation I
have is that I like--
at least I'm hopeful--
I think of you as change agents,
some sort of catalyst
for change.
And so I'm hoping that you'll
take not just what you get
from this course, but from the
whole program, back out and
have the opportunity to make
positive change, both
individually, in your community,
in the nation, and,
ideally, globally.
I want to also note--
I came across this
the other day--
some people get very
concerned about the
urgency of the situation.
And I can understand that,
if you look at
the trends and data.
But EF Schumacher many years ago
cautioned everyone that we
need to be patient.
And this is what I tell
colleagues and
students, as well.
I've gotten to be more patient
over the years.
And what Schumacher said was
that we each need to build
what he called alternative
lifeboats.
In a way, my home here and some
of the practices I use
are part of my alternative
lifeboat.
It's showing a way
to do things.
And there are many kinds of
alternatives being tried all
over the world.
And we'll be trying
to weave those in
as part of the course.
Finally, just a couple of notes
about the relationship
between you and me.
Input, questions of any type
are always welcomed.
This is meant to be high
level of communication.
The best way to contact
me is by email.
I check my email
very regularly.
And if we need to have a
telephone conversation, we
need to do Skype, whatever the
case may be, start the
connection with email, and
we'll make sure that it
happens as soon as possible.
I'm very, very comfortable with
having you call me Jerry.
If you're comfortable
with that, I am.
That's my name.
And so, feel free to do that.
All my emails will be signed
Jerry and all the other notes.
So that's what I'll use
through the course.
So in closing, as I noted
before, because you all bring
so much to the course, I'm
really looking forward to
learning with you and
from you as we move
through this semester.